1. Which organelle in the cell, other than the nucleus, contains DNA?
(a) Centriole
(b) Golgi apparatus
(c) Lysosome
(d) Mitochondrion

2. Which one of the following statements is correct?
(a) Prions are the smallest free-living cells.
(b) The cell wall of Mycoplasmas is made up of amino sugars.
(c) Viroids consist of single-stranded RNA molecules
(d) Rickettsias lack cell wall

3. Which of the following statements are correct regarding the general difference between plant and animals cells?
1. Plant cells have cellulose cell walls whilst animal cells do not.
2. Plant cells do not have plasma membrane unlike animal cells which do.
3. Mature plant cell has one large vacuole whilst animal cell has many small vacuoles.
       Select the correct answer using the code given below:
(a) 1 and 2 only
(b) 1 and 3 only
(c) 2 and 3 only
(d) 1, 2 and 3

4. How does the plant cell differ from the animal cell?
(a) Mitochondria
(b) Cell wall
(c) Presence of protoplasm
(d) Cell nucleus

5. Which part of the animal cell is called power house?
(a) Cell wall
(b) Nucleus
(c) Mitochondria
(d) Entire cell

6. Plasma membrane is built up of :
(a) Protein
(b) Lipid
(c) Carbohydrate
(d) Both (a) and (b)

7. Which of the following cell organelles play the most significant role in protein synthesis ?
(a) Lysosome and Centrosome
(b) Endoplasmic reticulum and Ribosome
(c) Golgi apparatus and Mitochondria
(d) Lysosome and Mitochondria

8. The cellular and molecular control of programmed cell death are known as:
(a) Apoptosis
(b) Ageing
(c) Degeneration
(d) Necrosis

9. One term that generates the maximum number of ATP atoms in our system?
(a) Decomposition of glucose
(b) Kreb's cycle
(c) Last respiratory series
(d) Water decomposition

10. With reference to the recent developments in science, which one of the following statements is not correct?
(a) Functional chromosomes can be created by joining segments of DNA taken from cells of different species.
(b) Pieces of artificial functional DNA can be created in laboratories.
(c) A piece of DNA taken out from an animal cell can be made to replicate outside a living cell in a laboratory.
(d) Cells taken out from plants and animals can be made to undergo cell division in laboratory petri dishes.

11. With reference to recent developments regarding 'Recombinant Vector Vaccines', consider the following statements:
1. Genetic engineering is applied in the development of these vaccines.
2. Bacteria and viruses are used as vectors.
       Which of the statements given above is/are correct?
(a) 1 only
(b) 2 only
(c) Both 1 and 2
(d) Neither 1 nor 2

12. Recombinant DNA Technology (Genetic Engineering) allows genes to be transferred -
1. Across different species of plants.
2. From animals to plants.
3. From microorganisms to higher organisms.
       Select the correct answer using the codes given below
(a) Only 1
(b) 2 and 3
(c) 1 and 3
(d) All of these

13. Steps of Recombinant DNA technology are given below:
A. Identification and isolation of the genetic material.
B. Fragmentation of DNA.
C. Obtaining the foreign gene product.
D. Downstream processing.
E. Ligation of DNA fragmentation into the vector.
F. Isolation of desired DNA fragments.
G. Amplification of gene of interest.
H. Transfer of Recombinant DNA into the host cell/ organism.
       The correct sequence of steps is
(a) C→A→B→D→E→F→G→H
(b) A→D→C→B→E→G→F→H
(c) A→B→F→G→E→H→C→D
(d) H→F→G→E→A→D→B→C

14. Assertion (A): Scientists can cut apart and paste together DNA molecules at will, regardless of the source of the molecules.
       Reason (R) : DNA fragments can be manipulated using restriction endonucleases and DNA ligases.
       Code:
(a) Both (A) and (R) are true and (R) is the correct explanation of (A).
(b) Both (A) and (R) are true but (R) is not a correct explanation of (A).
(c) (A) is true but (R) is false.
(d) (A) is false but (R) is true.

15. What is Cas9 protein that is often mentioned in news?
(a) A molecular scissors used in targeted gene editing
(b) A biosensor used in the accurate detection of pathogens in patients
(c) A gene that makes plants pest-resistant
(d) A herbicidal substance synthesized in genetically modified crops

16. Which one was the first successful cloned animal?
(a) Sheep
(b) Rabbit
(c) Gibbon
(d) None of the above

17. Which of the following statements about a clone of an organism is correct?
(a) A clone has characteristics of both its parents
(b) A clone is produced asexually
(c) Identical twins are clones of an organism
(d) Two clones of an organism may not be identical

18. In the case of a test-tube baby
(a) Fertilization takes place inside the test-tube
(b) Development of the baby takes place inside the test- tube
(c) Fertilization takes place outside the mother's body
(d) Unfertilised egg develops inside the test-tube.

19. Consider the following effects of genetic engineering:
1. Disease resistance
2. Growth promotion
3. Animal cloning
4. Human cloning
Of the above, that have been tried with a certain amount of success include:
(a) 1, 3 and 4
(b) 1, 2 and 4
(c) 2, 3 and 4
(d) 1, 2 and 3

20. At present, scientists can determine the arrangement or relative positions of genes or DNA sequences on a chromosome. How does this knowledge benefit us? 
1. It is possible to know the pedigree of livestock.
2. It is possible to understand the causes of all human diseases.
3. It is possible to develop disease-resistant animal breeds.
Which of the statements given above is/are correct?
(a) 1 and 2
(b) 1 and 3
(c) 2 only
(d) 1, 2, and 3

21. Insect-resistant cotton plants have been genetically engineered by inserting a gene from a/an :
(a) Virus
(b) Bacterium
(c) Insect
(d) Plant

22. The American multinational company, Monsanto, has produced an insect-resistant cotton variety that is undergoing field trials in India. A toxin gene from which one of the following bacteria has been transferred to this transgenic cotton ?
(a) Bacillus subtilis
(b) Bacillus thuringiensis
(c) Bacillus amyloliquifaciens
(d) Bacillus globlii

23. The micro-organism which is associated with the production of Bt cotton is a
(a) Fungus
(b) Bacterium
(c) Blue-green algae
(d) Virus

24. Assertion (A): Insect resistant transgenic cotton has been produced by inserting Bt gene.
       Reason (R) : The Bt gene is derived from a bacterium.
    Code:
(a) Both (A) and (R) are true and (R) is the correct explanation of (A).
(b) Both (A) and (R) are true (R) is not a correct explanation of (A).
(c) (A) is true but (R) is true.
(d) (A) is false but (R) is true.

25. A genetically engineered form of brinjal, known as the Bt. brinjal has been developed. The objective of this is -
(a) To make it pest-resistant
(b) To improve its taste and nutritive qualities
(c) To make it drought-resistant
(d) To make it shelf-life longer

Answer Key
1. Ans. (d)
2. Ans. (c)
3. Ans. (c)
4. Ans. (b)
5. Ans. (c)
6. Ans. (d)
7. Ans. (b)
8. Ans. (a)
9. Ans. (b)
10. Ans. (a)
11. Ans. (c)
12. Ans. (d)
13. Ans. (c)
14. Ans. (a)
15. Ans. (a)
16. Ans. (a)
17. Ans. (b)
18. Ans. (c)
19. Ans. (d)
20. Ans. (c)
21. Ans. (b)
22. Ans. (b)
23. Ans. (b)
24. Ans. (a)
25. Ans. (a)

