1. Indus Civilization existed in-
(a) Prehistoric age
(b) Proto-historic age
(c) Historic age
(d) Post-Historic age

2. The source of knowledge about Harappan culture is:
(a) Rock edicts
(b) Writing in terracotta seals
(c) Archaeological excavations
(d) All of the above

3. Match List-I with List-II and select the correct answer using the codes given below the lists:
    List-I	List-II
A. Harappa	1. N.G. Majumdar (1936-37)
B. Hastinapur	2. John Marshall (1913-34)
C. Takshashila	3. Daya Ram Sahni (1923-24 & 1924-25)
D. Kaushambi	4. B.B. Lal (1950-52)
Codes:
    	A	B	C	D
(a) 	4	2	1	3
(b) 	1	3	4	2
(c) 	3	4	2	1
(d) 	4	1	3	2

4. The beginning of idol worship is to be considered in
(a) Pre-Aryan
(b) Vedic period
(c) Mauryan Period
(d) Kushan Period

5. Which one of the following animals was not represented on the seals and terracotta art of the Harappan culture?
(a) Cow
(b) Elephant
(c) Rhinoceros
(d) Tiger

6. Match List-I (Ancient site) with List- II (Archaeological finding) and select the correct answer using the code given below the lists:
    List- I	List- II
(Ancient site)	(Archaeological finding)
A. Lothal	1. Ploughed field
B. Kalibangan	2. Dockyard
C. Dholavira	3. Terracotta replica of a Plough
D. Banawali	4. An inscription comprising ten large-sized signs of the Harappan script  
Code:
    	A	B	C	D
(a)	1	2	3	4
(b) 	2	1	4	3
(c) 	1	2	4	3
(d) 	2	1	3	4

7. A ploughed field was discovered at -
(a) Mohenjodaro
(b) Kalibangan
(c) Harappa
(d) Lothal

8. Match List-I with List-II and select the correct answer from the codes given below :
    List-I		List-II
A. Harappa		1. Cemetry R-37
B. Lothal		2. Dockyard
C. Kalibangan		3. Dancing Girl Statue
D. Mohenjo-Daro		4. Furrowed land
Codes:
    	A	B	C	D
(a) 	1	2	3	4
(b) 	2	1	4	3
(c) 	3	4	1	2
(d) 	1	2	4	3

9. Match List-I with List-II and select the correct answer by using the codes given below the lists :
    List-I		List-II
A. Harappa		1. Godavari
B. Hastinapur		2. Ravi
C. Nagarjuna Konda	3. Ganga
D. Paithan		4. Krishna
Code:
   	A	B	C	D
(a) 	1	2	3	4
(b) 	2	3	4	1
(c) 	4	3	2	1
(d) 	3	4	1	2

10. The Great Bath was found from the Indus Valley civilization at -
(a) Mohenjodaro
(b) Lothal
(c) Harappa
(d) Kalibangan

11. From which archaeological site of Indus Valley Civilization, the figures or models of boat are found?
(a) Harappa and Kotdiji
(b) Kalibangan and Ropar
(c) Dhaulabira and Bhagatray
(d) Mohenjodaro and Lothal

12. Which of the following is not correctly matched -
(a) Alamgirpur	-	Uttar Pradesh
(b) Lothal	-	Gujarat
(c) Kalibangan	-	Haryana
(d) Ropar	-	Punjab

13. Match List-I with List-II and select the correct answer from the code given below :
    List - I		List - II 
(Harappan Site)		(Location)
A. Manda		1. Rajasthan
B. Daimabad		2. Haryana
C. Kalibangan		3. Jammu-Kashmir
D. Rakhigarhi		4. Maharashtra
Code:
      	A	B	C	D
(a) 	1	2	3	4
(b) 	2	3	4	1
(c) 	3	4	1	2
(d) 	4	1	2	3

14. Match List-I with List-II and select the correct answer from the code given below the lists.
    List-I			List-II
(Harappan Site)			(UT/State of India)
1. Uttar Pradesh		A. Balu
2. Jammu and Kashmir		B. Manda
3. Haryana			C. Padri
4. Gujarat			D. Hulas  
Code:
      	A	B	C	D
(a) 	3	2	1	4
(b) 	2	3	4	1
(c) 	2	4	3	1
(d) 	3	2	4	1

15. Mohenjodaro is situated in which of the following?
(a) Gujarat state of India
(b) Punjab state of India
(c) Sindh Province in Pakistan
(d) Afghanistan

16. Which site of Indus Valley is now in Pakistan?
(a) Kalibangan
(b) Lothal
(c) Harappa
(d) Alamgirpur

17. The port city of Indus Valley Civilization was -
(a) Harappa
(b) Kalibangan
(c) Lothal
(d) Mohenjodaro

18. What is the most significant feature of the Indus Valley Civilization?
(a) Burnt brick buildings
(b) First true arches
(c) Buildings of worship
(d) Art and architecture
(e) None of the above/ More than one of the above

19. The largest site of Harappa in India is  
(a) Alamgirpur
(b) Kalibangan
(c) Lothal
(d) Rakhigarhi

20. Who was the director of the archaeological excavation that led to the discovery of Harappa and Mohenjodaro?
(a) Lord Macaulay
(b) Sir John Marshall
(c) Clive
(d) Colonel Tad

21. The first archaeologist who excavated Harappa, but could not recognize its significance, was:
(a) A. Cunningham
(b) Sir John Marshall
(c) Mortimer Wheeler
(d) George F. Dales

22. What is the correct chronological order in which the following appeared in India ?
1. Gold coins
2. Punch-marked silver coins
3. Iron plough
4. Urban culture
Select the correct answer using the codes given below:
(a) 3, 4, 1, 2
(b) 4, 3, 1, 2
(c) 3, 4, 2, 1
(d) 4, 3, 2, 1


23. The first metal used by man was :
(a) Gold
(b) Copper
(c) Silver
(d) Iron

24. Consider the following statements and select the correct answer from the given code :
1. Mohenjodaro, Harappa, Ropar and Kalibangan are the main sites of Indus valley civilization.
2. People of Harappa developed the road, proper housing and drainage system.
3. People of Harappa were unknown about the use of metals.
Code:
(a) 1 and 2 are correct
(b) 1 and 3 are correct
(c) 2 and 3 are correct
(d) 1, 2 and 3 are correct


25. Which Harappan city is divided into three parts?
(a) Lothal
(b) Dholavira
(c) Kalibangan
(d) Surkotada

26. What are 'Fundamental Rights'?
a) Judiciable
b) flexible
c) Non - Judiciable
d) Hard

27. Which of the following articles of the Constitution of India deals with equality before law?
a) Article 16
b) Article 15
c) Article 14
d) Article 13

28. Which of the following is not included in the fundamental right to equality?
a) Equality before law
b) Social equality
c) Equality of opportunity
d) Economic equality

29. The 'Right to Freedom' in the Indian Constitution is provided by four articles, which are-
a) Article 19 to Article 22
b) Article 16 to Article 19
c) Article 17 to Article 20
d) Article 18 to Article 21

30. Which of the following does not come within the scope of Article 21 of the Constitution?
a) Medical assistance to the injured by a doctor
b) Sexual harassment of women at workplace
c) Contaminating the quality of water
d) death penalty

31. Right to education of all children between the age of 6 years to 14 years-
a) Is included in the Directive Principles of State Policy.
b) It is a fundamental right.
c) Is a statutory right.
d) None of the above. 

32. Which article of the Indian Constitution deals with the fundamental right against exploitation of children?
a) Article 17
b) Article 23
c) Article 19
d) Article 24

33. Under Preventive Detention, can a person be detained without trial?
a) for one month
b) up to three months
c) up to six months
d) up to nine months

34. The Indian Constitution recognizes
a) Only religious minorities
b) only linguistic minorities
c) Religious and linguistic minorities
d) Religious, linguistic and ethnic minorities

35. The protector of fundamental rights is-
a) Judiciary
b) Executive
c) Parliament
d) None of the above

36. Which one of the following rights was recognized by Dr. B. R. What has Ambedkar called the soul of the Constitution?
a) Right to freedom of religion
b) Right to property
c) Right to equality
d) Right to constitutional remedies

37. When was the fundamental right to property abolished?
a) By the 44th amendment of the Constitution in 1978
b) By 46th amendment of the Constitution in 1982
c) By 31st amendment of the Constitution in 1973
d) none of these

38. Which of the following is not among the six fundamental rights provided by the Constitution of India?
a) Right to equality
b) Right to protest
c) Right against exploitation
d) Right to freedom of religion

39. In the context of India, which of the following is the correct relationship between rights and duties?
a) Rights are co-related with duties.
b) Rights are individual, hence independent of society and duties.
c) Rights, not duties, are important for the development of the personality of acitizen.
d) Duties, not rights, are important for the stability of the state.

40. In which of the following articles of the Indian Constitution, it is provided that all minorities will have the right to establish and administer educational institutions of their choice?
a) Article 28
b) Article 29
c) Article 30
d) Article 31

41. Consider the following statements regarding fundamental rights in India
1. These state acts are guarantees against the state.
2. These are listed in Part-3 of the Constitution.
3. Ensure social, economic and political justice.
4. This is not like the force of rights in the United States.
Code:
a) 1 and 2
b) 2 and 3
c) 1, 3 and 4
d) 2, 3 and 4

42. Which case gave the Parliament the right to amend the fundamental rights?
a) Kesavananda Bharti case
b) Raj Narayan vs Indira Gandhi case
c) Gokal Nath case
d) Sajjan Kumar case

43. Who among the following has been given the power to enforce fundamental rights by the Constitution?
a) to all courts of India
b) to the parliament
c) to the President
d) Supreme Court and High Courts

44. Which of the following is envisaged by the Right against Exploitation in the Constitution of India?
1. Prohibition of human flesh trade and forced labour
2. abolition of untouchability
3. protection of interests of minorities
4. Prohibition of employment of children in factories and mines
Select the correct answer using the code given below:
a) 1, 2 and 4 only
b) 2, 3 and 4 only
c) 1 and 4 only
d) 1, 2, 3 and 4

45. Which of the following has been recognized by the Supreme Court as a fundamental right?
1. right to housing
2. right to travel abroad
3. for similar work
4. right to equal pay
Code:
a) 1 and 2
b) 2 and 3
c) 1 and 3
d) all these

46. On whose recommendation was the Fundamental Duty included in the Indian Constitution?
a) of Balwant Rai Mehta Committee
b) Iyengar Committee's
c) of the Golden Singh Committee
d) Thakkar committee's

47. In which article is the right to freedom?
a) Article 14-18
b) Article 19-22
c) Article- 23-24
d) none of these

48. Under which article in the Indian Constitution, fundamental rights have been provided to the citizens?
a) Article 112 to 115
b) Articles 222 to 235
c) Articles 12 to 35
d) none of these

49. Which one of the following rights is available to all people under the Indian Constitution?
a)  Right to equal protection of law
b)  Right to discriminate
c)  Right to freedom of expression
d)  Cultural and educational rights

50. Under which article of the Constitution, reservation facility has been provided for Other Backward Classes, Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes in educational institutions, including non-government and non-aided ones?
a) Article 15(4)
b) Article 15(5)
c) Article 16(4)
d) Article 16(5)

51. Which organelle in the cell, other than the nucleus, contains DNA?
(a) Centriole
(b) Golgi apparatus
(c) Lysosome
(d) Mitochondrion

52. Which one of the following statements is correct?
(a) Prions are the smallest free-living cells.
(b) The cell wall of Mycoplasmas is made up of amino sugars.
(c) Viroids consist of single-stranded RNA molecules
(d) Rickettsias lack cell wall

53. Which of the following statements are correct regarding the general difference between plant and animals cells?
1. Plant cells have cellulose cell walls whilst animal cells do not.
2. Plant cells do not have plasma membrane unlike animal cells which do.
3. Mature plant cell has one large vacuole whilst animal cell has many small vacuoles.
       Select the correct answer using the code given below:
(a) 1 and 2 only
(b) 1 and 3 only
(c) 2 and 3 only
(d) 1, 2 and 3

54. How does the plant cell differ from the animal cell?
(a) Mitochondria
(b) Cell wall
(c) Presence of protoplasm
(d) Cell nucleus

55. Which part of the animal cell is called power house?
(a) Cell wall
(b) Nucleus
(c) Mitochondria
(d) Entire cell

56. Plasma membrane is built up of :
(a) Protein
(b) Lipid
(c) Carbohydrate
(d) Both (a) and (b)

57. Which of the following cell organelles play the most significant role in protein synthesis ?
(a) Lysosome and Centrosome
(b) Endoplasmic reticulum and Ribosome
(c) Golgi apparatus and Mitochondria
(d) Lysosome and Mitochondria

58. The cellular and molecular control of programmed cell death are known as:
(a) Apoptosis
(b) Ageing
(c) Degeneration
(d) Necrosis

59. One term that generates the maximum number of ATP atoms in our system?
(a) Decomposition of glucose
(b) Kreb's cycle
(c) Last respiratory series
(d) Water decomposition

60. With reference to the recent developments in science, which one of the following statements is not correct?
(a) Functional chromosomes can be created by joining segments of DNA taken from cells of different species.
(b) Pieces of artificial functional DNA can be created in laboratories.
(c) A piece of DNA taken out from an animal cell can be made to replicate outside a living cell in a laboratory.
(d) Cells taken out from plants and animals can be made to undergo cell division in laboratory petri dishes.

61. With reference to recent developments regarding 'Recombinant Vector Vaccines', consider the following statements:
1. Genetic engineering is applied in the development of these vaccines.
2. Bacteria and viruses are used as vectors.
       Which of the statements given above is/are correct?
(a) 1 only
(b) 2 only
(c) Both 1 and 2
(d) Neither 1 nor 2

62. Recombinant DNA Technology (Genetic Engineering) allows genes to be transferred -
1. Across different species of plants.
2. From animals to plants.
3. From microorganisms to higher organisms.
       Select the correct answer using the codes given below
(a) Only 1
(b) 2 and 3
(c) 1 and 3
(d) All of these

63. Steps of Recombinant DNA technology are given below:
A. Identification and isolation of the genetic material.
B. Fragmentation of DNA.
C. Obtaining the foreign gene product.
D. Downstream processing.
E. Ligation of DNA fragmentation into the vector.
F. Isolation of desired DNA fragments.
G. Amplification of gene of interest.
H. Transfer of Recombinant DNA into the host cell/ organism.
       The correct sequence of steps is
(a) C→A→B→D→E→F→G→H
(b) A→D→C→B→E→G→F→H
(c) A→B→F→G→E→H→C→D
(d) H→F→G→E→A→D→B→C

64. Assertion (A): Scientists can cut apart and paste together DNA molecules at will, regardless of the source of the molecules.
    Reason (R) : DNA fragments can be manipulated using restriction endonucleases and DNA ligases.
Code:
(a) Both (A) and (R) are true and (R) is the correct explanation of (A).
(b) Both (A) and (R) are true but (R) is not a correct explanation of (A).
(c) (A) is true but (R) is false.
(d) (A) is false but (R) is true.

65. What is Cas9 protein that is often mentioned in news?
(a) A molecular scissors used in targeted gene editing
(b) A biosensor used in the accurate detection of pathogens in patients
(c) A gene that makes plants pest-resistant
(d) A herbicidal substance synthesized in genetically modified crops

66. Which one was the first successful cloned animal?
(a) Sheep
(b) Rabbit
(c) Gibbon
(d) None of the above

67. Which of the following statements about a clone of an organism is correct?
(a) A clone has characteristics of both its parents
(b) A clone is produced asexually
(c) Identical twins are clones of an organism
(d) Two clones of an organism may not be identical

68. In the case of a test-tube baby
(a) Fertilization takes place inside the test-tube
(b) Development of the baby takes place inside the test- tube
(c) Fertilization takes place outside the mother's body
(d) Unfertilised egg develops inside the test-tube.

69. Consider the following effects of genetic engineering:
1. Disease resistance
2. Growth promotion
3. Animal cloning
4. Human cloning
Of the above, that have been tried with a certain amount of success include:
(a) 1, 3 and 4
(b) 1, 2 and 4
(c) 2, 3 and 4
(d) 1, 2 and 3

70. At present, scientists can determine the arrangement or relative positions of genes or DNA sequences on a chromosome. How does this knowledge benefit us? 
1. It is possible to know the pedigree of livestock.
2. It is possible to understand the causes of all human diseases.
3. It is possible to develop disease-resistant animal breeds.
Which of the statements given above is/are correct?
(a) 1 and 2
(b) 1 and 3
(c) 2 only
(d) 1, 2, and 3

71. Insect-resistant cotton plants have been genetically engineered by inserting a gene from a/an :
(a) Virus
(b) Bacterium
(c) Insect
(d) Plant

72. The American multinational company, Monsanto, has produced an insect-resistant cotton variety that is undergoing field trials in India. A toxin gene from which one of the following bacteria has been transferred to this transgenic cotton ?
(a) Bacillus subtilis
(b) Bacillus thuringiensis
(c) Bacillus amyloliquifaciens
(d) Bacillus globlii

73. The micro-organism which is associated with the production of Bt cotton is a
(a) Fungus
(b) Bacterium
(c) Blue-green algae
(d) Virus

74. Assertion (A): Insect resistant transgenic cotton has been produced by inserting Bt gene.
    Reason (R) : The Bt gene is derived from a bacterium.
    Code:
(a) Both (A) and (R) are true and (R) is the correct explanation of (A).
(b) Both (A) and (R) are true (R) is not a correct explanation of (A).
(c) (A) is true but (R) is true.
(d) (A) is false but (R) is true.

75. A genetically engineered form of brinjal, known as the Bt. brinjal has been developed. The objective of this is -
(a) To make it pest-resistant
(b) To improve its taste and nutritive qualities
(c) To make it drought-resistant
(d) To make it shelf-life longer

